.TH IFTOP 8 "2026-03-27" "iftopcolor 1.5.0" "System Administration"
.\"
.\" iftop.8:
.\" Manual page for iftopcolor (iftop fork with full-spectrum color).
.\"

.SH NAME
iftop \- display bandwidth usage on an interface by host

.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBiftop\fP \fB\-h\fP
.br
\fBiftop\fP
[\fB\-nNpblBPZ\fP]
[\fB\-i\fP \fIinterface\fP]
[\fB\-f\fP \fIfilter\ code\fP]
[\fB\-F\fP \fInet\fP/\fImask\fP]
[\fB\-G\fP \fInet6\fP/\fImask6\fP]
[\fB\-m\fP \fIlimit\fP]
[\fB\-c\fP \fIconfig\ file\fP]

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBiftop\fP listens to network traffic on a named \fIinterface\fP, or on the
first interface it can find which looks like an external interface if none is
specified, and displays a table of current bandwidth usage by pairs of hosts.
\fBiftop\fP must be run with sufficient permissions to monitor all network
traffic on the \fIinterface\fP; see \fBpcap\fP(3) for more information, but on
most systems this means that it must be run as root.
.PP
This is \fBiftopcolor\fP, a fork of the original iftop with fully customizable
color schemes via a config file (\fB~/.iftopcolors\fP), performance-optimized
data structures including pool-allocated hash tables and direct-index service
lookup arrays, and a comprehensive test and benchmark suite.
.PP
By default, \fBiftop\fP will look up the hostnames associated with addresses it
finds in packets.  This can cause substantial traffic of itself, and may result
in a confusing display.  You may wish to suppress display of DNS traffic by
using filter code such as \fBnot port domain\fP, or switch it off entirely,
by using the \fB\-n\fP option or by pressing \fBn\fP when the program is
running.
.PP
By default, \fBiftop\fP counts all IP packets that pass through the filter, and
the direction of the packet is determined according to the direction the packet
is moving across the interface.  Using the \fB\-F\fP option it is possible to
get \fBiftop\fP to show packets entering and leaving a given network.  For
example, \fBiftop \-F 10.0.0.0/255.0.0.0\fP will analyse packets flowing in
and out of the 10.* network.
.PP
Some other filter ideas:
.TP
\fBnot ether host ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff\fP
Ignore ethernet broadcast packets.
.TP
\fBport http and not host \fP\fIwebcache.example.com\fP
Count web traffic only, unless it is being directed through a local web cache.
.TP
\fBicmp\fP
How much bandwidth is being used by ICMP traffic?

.SH REQUIREMENTS

.TS
l l.
CMake 3.10+	Build system
libpcap	Packet capture substrate
ncurses (ncursesw on Linux)	Terminal rendering engine
pthreads	Parallel execution threads
.TE
.SS Platform-specific installation
.TP
\fBDebian/Ubuntu\fP
sudo apt install cmake libpcap\-dev libncursesw5\-dev
.TP
\fBFedora/RHEL\fP
sudo dnf install cmake libpcap\-devel ncurses\-devel
.TP
\fBmacOS\fP
brew install cmake (libpcap and ncurses ship with Xcode CLI tools)
.TP
\fBFreeBSD\fP
pkg install cmake

.SH INSTALLATION

.nf
  git clone https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies/iftopcolor.git
  cd iftopcolor
  mkdir build && cd build && cmake ..
  make
  sudo make install
.fi
.PP
The binary is installed to \fB/usr/local/sbin\fP.  The man page is installed
to \fB/usr/local/share/man/man8\fP.  Make sure \fB/usr/local/sbin\fP is in
your \fBPATH\fP.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
\fB\-h\fP
Print a summary of usage.
.TP
\fB\-n\fP
Don't do hostname lookups.
.TP
\fB\-N\fP
Do not resolve port numbers to service names.
.TP
\fB\-p\fP
Run in promiscuous mode, so that traffic which does not pass directly through
the specified interface is also counted.
.TP
\fB\-P\fP
Turn on port display.
.TP
\fB\-l\fP
Display and count datagrams addressed to or from link-local IPv6 addresses.
The default is not to display that address category.
.TP
\fB\-b\fP
Don't display bar graphs of traffic.
.TP
\fB\-B\fP
Display bandwidth rates in bytes/sec rather than bits/sec.
.TP
\fB\-i\fP \fIinterface\fP
Listen to packets on \fIinterface\fP.
.TP
\fB\-f\fP \fIfilter code\fP
Use \fIfilter code\fP to select the packets to count.  Only IP packets are ever
counted, so the specified code is evaluated as
\fB(\fP\fIfilter code\fP\fB) and (ip or ip6)\fP.
.TP
\fB\-F\fP \fInet\fP/\fImask\fP
Specifies an IPv4 network for traffic analysis.  If specified, iftop will only
include packets flowing in to or out of the given network, and packet direction
is determined relative to the network boundary, rather than to the interface.
You may specify \fImask\fP as a dotted quad, such as /255.255.255.0, or as a
single number specifying the number of bits set in the netmask, such as /24.
.TP
\fB\-G\fP \fInet6\fP/\fImask6\fP
Specifies an IPv6 network for traffic analysis.  The value of \fImask6\fP can
be given as a prefix length or as a numerical address string for more compound
bitmasking.
.TP
\fB\-m\fP \fIlimit\fP
Set the upper limit for the bar graph scale to \fIlimit\fP, e.g.\& "10M".
The value must always be in bits, regardless of whether the option to display
in bytes has been chosen.
.TP
\fB\-c\fP \fIconfig file\fP
Specifies an alternate config file.  If not specified, iftop will use
\fB~/.iftoprc\fP if it exists.  See
.B CONFIG FILE
below for a description of config file directives.
.TP
\fB\-Z\fP
Enable per-process bandwidth attribution.  Each flow is annotated with the
name of the process that owns the local socket.  On macOS this uses
\fBlibproc\fP; on Linux it reads \fB/proc\fP.  If the platform is unsupported
or permissions are insufficient, process names are silently omitted.

.SH DISPLAY

When running, \fBiftop\fP uses the whole screen to display network usage.  At
the top of the display is a logarithmic scale for the bar graph which gives a
visual indication of traffic.
.PP
The main part of the display lists, for each pair of hosts, the rate at which
data has been sent and received over the preceding 2, 10 and 40 second
intervals.  The direction of data flow is indicated by arrows, <= and =>.
For instance,
.PP
.nf
  foo.example.com  =>  bar.example.com      1Kb  500b   100b
                   <=                       2Mb    2Mb    2Mb
.fi
.PP
shows, on the first line, traffic from \fBfoo.example.com\fP to
\fBbar.example.com\fP; in the preceding 2 seconds, this averaged 1Kbit/s,
around half that amount over the preceding 10s, and a fifth of that over the
whole of the last 40s.  During each of those intervals, the data sent in the
other direction was about 2Mbit/s.  On the actual display, part of each line
is inverted to give a visual indication of the 10s average of traffic.
.PP
By default, the pairs of hosts responsible for the most traffic (10 second
average) are displayed at the top of the list.
.PP
At the bottom of the display, various totals are shown, including peak traffic
over the last 40s, total traffic transferred (after filtering), and total
transfer rates averaged over 2s, 10s and 40s.

.SH INTERACTIVE COMMANDS

.TP
.B n
Toggle DNS host resolution.
.TP
.B s
Toggle display of source host.
.TP
.B d
Toggle display of destination host.
.TP
.B t
Cycle through line display modes: two-line (default), one-line-both,
one-line-received, one-line-sent.
.TP
.B N
Toggle service name resolution for port numbers.
.TP
.B S
Toggle display of source port.
.TP
.B D
Toggle display of destination port.
.TP
.B p
Toggle port display on/off.
.TP
.BR 1 ", " 2 ", " 3
Sort by the 1st, 2nd, or 3rd column (2s, 10s, or 40s average).
.TP
.B <
Sort by source hostname.
.TP
.B >
Sort by destination hostname.
.TP
.B o
Freeze current display order.  Traffic between hosts not currently visible will
not be shown, but is still included in totals.
.TP
.B P
Pause display.
.TP
.B h
Toggle the help display.
.TP
.B b
Toggle bar graph display.
.TP
.B B
Cycle bar graph averaging period.
.TP
.B T
Toggle cumulative line totals.
.TP
.BR j " / " k
Scroll the display of hosts.  Most useful when the display order is frozen.
.TP
.B f
Edit the BPF filter code while running.  Note that changing the filter affects
only newly captured traffic; existing entries may persist for up to 40 seconds.
.TP
.B l
Set a POSIX extended regular expression to filter hostnames on the display.
This does not affect what is captured, only what is shown.  Display filters do
not affect the totals at the bottom of the screen.
.TP
.B L
Toggle between linear and logarithmic bar graph scales.
.TP
.B Z
Toggle per-process bandwidth attribution.  When enabled, the process name
owning each flow's local socket is shown in brackets after the destination
host.  Equivalent to the \fB\-Z\fP command-line option.
.TP
.B !
Run a shell command.
.TP
.B q
Quit.

.SH SOURCE / DEST AGGREGATION

By pressing \fBs\fP or \fBd\fP while \fBiftop\fP is running, all traffic
for each source or destination will be aggregated together.  This is most
useful when \fBiftop\fP is run in promiscuous mode, or is run on a gateway
machine.

.SH CONFIG FILE

iftop can read its configuration from a config file.  If the \fB\-c\fP option
is not specified, iftop will attempt to read its configuration from
\fB~/.iftoprc\fP, if it exists.  Any command line options specified will
override settings in the config file.
.PP
The config file consists of one configuration directive per line.  Each
directive is a name value pair, for example:
.PP
.nf
  interface: eth0
.fi
.PP
sets the network interface.  The following config directives are supported:

.TP
\fBinterface:\fP \fIif\fP
Sets the network interface to \fIif\fP.
.TP
\fBdns-resolution:\fP \fI(yes|no)\fP
Controls reverse lookup of IP addresses.
.TP
\fBport-resolution:\fP \fI(yes|no)\fP
Controls conversion of port numbers to service names.
.TP
\fBfilter-code:\fP \fIbpf\fP
Sets the filter code to \fIbpf\fP.
.TP
\fBshow-bars:\fP \fI(yes|no)\fP
Controls display of bar graphs.
.TP
\fBpromiscuous:\fP \fI(yes|no)\fP
Puts the interface into promiscuous mode.
.TP
\fBport-display:\fP \fI(off|source-only|destination-only|on)\fP
Controls display of port numbers.
.TP
\fBlink-local:\fP \fI(yes|no)\fP
Determines displaying of link-local IPv6 addresses.
.TP
\fBhide-source:\fP \fI(yes|no)\fP
Hides source host names.
.TP
\fBhide-destination:\fP \fI(yes|no)\fP
Hides destination host names.
.TP
\fBuse-bytes:\fP \fI(yes|no)\fP
Use bytes for bandwidth display, rather than bits.
.TP
\fBsort:\fP \fI(2s|10s|40s|source|destination)\fP
Sets which column is used to sort the display.
.TP
\fBline-display:\fP \fI(two-line|one-line-both|one-line-sent|one-line-received)\fP
Controls the appearance of each item in the display.
.TP
\fBshow-totals:\fP \fI(yes|no)\fP
Shows cumulative total for each item.
.TP
\fBshow-processes:\fP \fI(yes|no)\fP
Enables per-process bandwidth attribution.
.TP
\fBlog-scale:\fP \fI(yes|no)\fP
Use a logarithmic scale for bar graphs.
.TP
\fBmax-bandwidth:\fP \fIbw\fP
Fixes the maximum for the bar graph scale to \fIbw\fP, e.g.\& "10M".  The
value must always be in bits, regardless of whether the option to display in
bytes has been chosen.
.TP
\fBnet-filter:\fP \fInet/mask\fP
Defines an IP network boundary for determining packet direction.
.TP
\fBnet-filter6:\fP \fInet6/mask6\fP
Defines an IPv6 network boundary for determining packet direction.
.TP
\fBscreen-filter:\fP \fIregexp\fP
Sets a regular expression to filter screen output.

.SH COLOR CONFIGURATION

Create \fB~/.iftopcolors\fP to customize the display colors.  Each line sets
one element to a color and boldness.  Available colors: \fBred\fP, \fBblue\fP,
\fBgreen\fP, \fByellow\fP, \fBmagenta\fP, \fBcyan\fP, \fBblack\fP,
\fBwhite\fP.  Each can be \fBbold\fP or \fBnonbold\fP.
.PP
.nf
  # ~/.iftopcolors
  BOTH_BAR_COLOR              blue    bold
  HOST1_COLOR                 red     nonbold
  HOST2_COLOR                 red     bold
  SCALE_BAR_COLOR             red     nonbold
  SCALE_MARKERS_COLOR         red     bold
  DL_UL_INDICATOR_COLOR       blue    bold
  TWO_SECOND_TRANSFER_COLUMN_COLOR    yellow  bold
  TEN_SECOND_TRANSFER_COLUMN_COLOR    magenta bold
  FOURTY_SECOND_TRANSFER_COLUMN_COLOR yellow  bold
  BOTTOM_BAR_COLOR            blue    bold
  CUM_LABEL_COLOR             yellow  nonbold
  PEAK_LABEL_COLOR            magenta bold
  RATES_LABEL_COLOR           magenta bold
  TOTAL_LABEL_COLOR           blue    bold
  CUM_TRANSFER_COLUMN_COLOR   magenta nonbold
  PEAK_TRANSFER_COLUMN_COLOR  magenta nonbold
  RECEIVE_BAR_COLOR           yellow  nonbold
  SENT_BAR_COLOR              yellow  nonbold
.fi

.SH TESTING

A test suite of 474 tests covers core data structures and utilities.
.SS Running tests
.nf
  mkdir build && cd build && cmake ..
  make check
.fi
.PP
Run a single test suite:
.PP
.nf
  make check_hash
  ./check_hash
.fi
.SS Test suites
.TS
l l r.
Suite	Coverage	Tests
_
check_util	xmalloc, xcalloc, xrealloc, xstrdup, xfree, alloc chains	41
check_vector	Push, pop, remove, resize, iteration, shrink, ptr storage	68
check_hash	Generic hash: insert, find, delete, collisions, high load	59
check_addr_hash	IPv4/IPv6 pairs, pool allocator, fast-path, UDP, protocol	49
check_ns_hash	IPv6 address to hostname cache, adjacent addrs, scaling	31
check_serv_hash	Port+protocol to service name, protocol differentiation	27
check_sorted_list	Single insert, batch insert, descending order, destroy	46
check_stringmap	Binary tree insert, find, special chars, deep chains	46
check_cfgfile	Config parsing: string, bool, int, float, enum, file IO	77
check_leaks	Full lifecycle leak tests for all data structures (macOS)	30
_
	Total	474
.TE
.SS Memory leak analysis
Leak detection uses macOS \fBleaks \-\-atExit\fP to verify zero unreachable
allocations after full create/populate/destroy lifecycles for every data
structure.
.PP
.nf
  make leakcheck
.fi
.PP
Covers: vector, generic hash, address hash (pool allocator), ns_hash,
serv_table, sorted list (single and batch), stringmap, and config file
subsystems.

.SH BENCHMARKS

Benchmarks are compiled with aggressive optimizations:
\fB\-O3\fP, \fB\-march=native\fP, \fB\-flto\fP, \fB\-funroll\-loops\fP.
.SS Running benchmarks
.nf
  mkdir build && cd build && cmake \-DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release ..
  make bench
.fi
.PP
Run a single benchmark:
.PP
.nf
  ./bench/run_benchmarks.sh hash
  ./bench/run_benchmarks.sh vector
.fi
.SS Benchmark suites
.TS
l l.
Suite	Measures
_
benchmark_hash	Distribution, insert, find (hit/miss), scaling, delete, iterate
benchmark_sorted_list	Single O(n^2) vs batch O(n log n), iteration, destroy
benchmark_vector	Push, pop, remove (front/middle/back), iterate, reallocate
benchmark_pool	Pool vs malloc: insert/delete, churn, multi-block, reuse
benchmark_stringmap	Sequential vs random keys, find scaling, config workload
benchmark_ns_hash	IPv6 address cache: insert, find, delete, iteration, churn
benchmark_serv_hash	Service cache: insert, lookup, delete, TCP/UDP direct-index
benchmark_cfgfile	Config set/get, type parsing, file reading, realistic workload
.TE
.SS addr_hash vs hash \(em pool allocator vs generic malloc
The pool allocator is a custom slab that recycles fixed-size nodes, eliminating
per-packet malloc/free syscalls.
.PP
.nf
  OPERATION                     addr_hash       hash            SPEEDUP
  Insert 1000 IPv4 flows        10,710 ns/op    23,110 ns/op    2.2x
  Find hit (1000 entries)            2.5 ns/op        4.0 ns/op 1.6x

  ALLOCATOR                     TIME
  Pool  (insert 2000 + delete)  24.7 ms         2.1x faster
  Malloc (insert 2000 + delete) 51.6 ms         baseline
.fi
.PP
Hash distribution is near-ideal: IPv4 stddev 2.26 vs ideal 2.21,
IPv6 stddev 2.21 vs ideal 2.21.
.SS serv_table \(em direct-index array vs old chaining hash
The old serv_hash used a 123-bucket chaining hash with a degenerate hash
function that only hashed on protocol \(em all TCP entries landed in one bucket,
all UDP in another, producing worst-case chain walks on every lookup.
The new serv_table uses direct-index arrays for TCP/UDP (port number as array
index) with a small hash fallback for rare protocols.
.PP
.nf
  IMPLEMENTATION         FIND HIT (200 entries)  THROUGHPUT      MECHANISM
  serv_table [NEW]             0.5 ns/op         1.8B ops/s     array[port]
  serv_hash  [OLD]            53.4 ns/op        18.7M ops/s     chained hash
                                                                 100x FASTER
.fi
.PP
Memory cost: 1 MB (two 65536-entry pointer arrays for TCP and UDP).
.SS ns_hash \(em IPv6 address hostname cache
Specialized hash for IPv6 address-to-hostname resolution caching.
.PP
.nf
  VARIANT  FIND HIT (200 entries)  THROUGHPUT      KEY COMPARISON
  ns_hash        2.6 ns/op         384M ops/s     IN6_ARE_ADDR_EQUAL (16B memcmp)
.fi
.SS Sorted list \(em brute force O(n^2) vs batch O(n log n)
At small n the overhead of qsort dominates.  Past the crossover point, batch
mode pulls away.
.PP
.nf
  SIZE  SINGLE (one-by-one)  BATCH (qsort)     SPEEDUP
   100       4,290 ns/op       6,445 ns/op      0.7x (batch overhead)
   500      73,450 ns/op      43,656 ns/op      1.7x
  1000     230,920 ns/op      98,820 ns/op      2.3x
  2000     766,900 ns/op     205,380 ns/op      3.7x
  5000   4,585,000 ns/op     613,951 ns/op      7.5x
.fi
.SS Stringmap \(em unbalanced BST under duress
Sequential keys degenerate the unbalanced binary tree into a linked list.
.PP
.nf
  OPERATION (1000 keys)  SEQUENTIAL       RANDOM           PENALTY
  Insert                 873,510 ns/op    66,974 ns/op      13x
  Find hit                 758.8 ns/op       56.5 ns/op    13.4x
.fi
.PP
Sequential keys give O(n) per operation.  Random keys give O(log n).
.SS Vector \(em contiguous memory operations
.nf
  OPERATION                         PERFORMANCE
  push_back 10,000 items            4,435 ns/op       amortized O(1)
  remove from front (1000 items)   36,240 ns/op       O(n) memmove
  iterate 10,000 items               574.6 ns/pass    ~0.057 ns/element
.fi
.PP
Iteration runs at cache-line speed: 0.057 ns/element is approximately
17.5 billion elements per second.

.SH PLATFORM NOTES

.TP
\fBRedHat 7.2\fP
A bug in the bundled ncurses can cause a segfault.  Update ncurses from
Rawhide.
.TP
\fBSlackware 8.1\fP
You may need to upgrade libpcap (via the tcpdump package) to compile.
.TP
\fBFreeBSD 4.7\fP
Lacks a proper \fBgethostbyaddr_r\fP.  Use \fB\-\-with\-resolver=\fP\fI...\fP
to select an alternative resolver.
.TP
\fBSolaris\fP
iftop must run in promiscuous mode to capture outgoing packets.  This is
auto-configured; the \fB\-p\fP flag disables the non-broadcast packet filter.
You may also need ncurses instead of the bundled curses.

.SH QUIRKS

There are some circumstances in which iftop may not do what you expect.  In
most cases what it is doing is logical, and we believe it is correct behaviour.
.PP
\fBTotals don't add up\fP
.PP
There are several reasons why the totals may not appear to add up.  The
most obvious is having a screen filter in effect, or screen ordering
frozen.  In this case some captured information is not being shown to
you, but is included in the totals.
.PP
A more subtle explanation comes about when running in promiscuous mode
without specifying a \fB\-F\fP option.  In this case there is no easy way
to assign the direction of traffic between two third parties.  For the purposes
of the main display this is done in an arbitrary fashion (by ordering of IP
addresses), but for the sake of totals all traffic between other hosts is
accounted as incoming, because that's what it is from the point of view of your
interface.  The \fB\-F\fP option allows you to specify an arbitrary network
boundary, and to show traffic flowing across it.
.PP
\fBPeak totals don't add up\fP
.PP
The peak sent and peak received didn't necessarily happen at the same time.
The peak total is the maximum of sent plus received in each captured time
division.
.PP
\fBChanging the filter code doesn't seem to work\fP
.PP
Give it time.  Changing the filter code affects what is captured from
the time that you entered it, but most of what is on the display is
based on some fraction of the last 40s window of capturing.  After
changing the filter there may be entries on the display that are
disallowed by the current filter for up to 40s.  Display filtering has
immediate effect and does not affect what is captured.

.SH FILES

.TP
\fB~/.iftoprc\fP
Configuration file for iftop.
.TP
\fB~/.iftopcolors\fP
Color configuration file for iftopcolor.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR tcpdump (8),
.BR pcap (3),
.BR driftnet (1).

.SH AUTHORS
Paul Warren <pdw@ex\-parrot.com> (original iftop)
.br
Jacob Menke (iftopcolor fork)

.SH VERSION
iftopcolor 1.1

.SH COPYING
This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.
.PP
This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.
.PP
You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
